---
layout: post
title: A new strain of Meltdown and Spectre - "Variant 4"
tags: [Cyber News]
---

Intel and Microsoft announced on May 21, about a newly found variant of Meltdown and Spectre vulnerability. Intel is calling this new strain *"Variant 4"* or *"Speculative Store Bypass"*. This particular strain utilizes *Memory Disambiguation* technique used in store buffers for leaking side channel information \[[1]\].

Store buffers are used for buffering which greatly increases performance because the microprocessor does not have to wait for the pending load operations. But, there are certain problems associated with it as well. The data read from memory might have been updated by an outstanding write and this might have not been made available to external memory yet. In such a case the processor has to scan the store buffer prior to loading any data from external memory. This process is often called as "Memory Disambiguation".

This is a time-consuming process and to speed it up, modern processors utilize a technique known as "Speculative Store Buffer Bypass" that assumes that there is no update in the buffered data and executes the program instructions speculatively while also performing the search in the store buffer. This increases performance because conflicts are rare and it is simply resolved by throwing away the results and repeating the calculations. Some microprocessors track the number of conflicts occurring due to store buffer and automatically disable this functionality when there are many conflicts.

Cache side-channel analysis can be applied to store buffer speculation to leak information. Careful timing of subsequent store and load can be used to determine whether those values were previously cached. As a result, the data loaded speculatively can be determined. But, unlike the previous attack, store buffer only allows reading access to a memory location of the same privilege level \[[2]\].

---

## References
\[1\] Google Project Zero, "Speculative execution, variant 4: speculative store bypass".
\[2\] Masters J., "Speculative Store Bypass explained: what it is, how it works", Red Hat Blog.

[1]: https://bugs.chromium.org/p/project-zero/issues/detail?id=1528 "speculative execution, variant 4: speculative store bypass"
[2]: https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/speculative-store-bypass-explained-what-it-how-it-works "Speculative Store Bypass explained: what it is, how it works"
---
